=pod

=head1 NAME

ur - Command line tool to manage metadata within a namespace

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  ur define namespace MyApp

  ur describe MyApp::Some::Class

  ur update classes

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<ur> is a command-line wrapper around the L<UR::Namespace::Command> tree
of modules.  They manipulate, display and alter metadata within a namespace.

=head1 Overview

Like other L<UR::Command>-based commands, C<ur> by itself doesn't do much.
It functions as an entry point to the various sub-commands for displaying,
changing and updating metadata.  If insufficient arguments are given on the
command line, or if C<--help> is on the command line, then the command will
display some helpful documentation such as accepted command line args and
available sub-commands.

All the modules implementing the sub-commands are locted under
UR::Namespace::Command

=head1 Top-level commands

These are the commands available at the top level.

=over 4

=item ur browser

Start a local web server that presents an HTML-based view of the current
namespace's classes and schema.

=item ur define <class|datasource|namespace>

Define contains sub-commands for defining Namespaces, Data Sources and Classes.

=item ur describe <class name>

Display information about a class or data source entity to STDOUT.

=item ur diff <rewrite|update>

Display differences between versions of class definitions.

=item ur list <classes|modules|objects>

Display lists of classes, modules and objects

=item ur redescribe <class names>

Re-format a class description to the current standard and print it to STDOUT

=item ur rewrite <class names>

Re-format a class description to the current standard and save it back to the
module file.

=item ur test <callcount|compile|eval|run|use>

Test contains sub-commands for running and performing different types of
tests within a Namespace.

=item ur update <classes|class-diagram|schema-diagram>

Update contains sub-commands for updating the Namespace's class structure
based on the current database schema (C<update>), or for creating and 
updating an umlet diagram about a class or schema structure.

=back




