=pod

=head1 NAME

UR::Context - Manage the current state of the application

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use AppNamespace;

  my $obj = AppNamespace::SomeClass->get(id => 1234);
  $obj->some_property('I am changed');

  UR::Context->get_current->rollback; # some_property reverts to its original value

  $obj->other_property('Now, I am changed');

  UR::Context->commit; # other_property now permanently has that value


=head1 DESCRIPTION

The main application code will rarely interact with UR::Context objects
directly, except for the C<commit> and C<rollback> methods.  It manages
the mappings between an application's classes, object cache, and external
data sources.

=head1 SUBCLASSES

UR::Context is an abstract class.  When an application starts up, the system
creates a handful of Contexts that logically exist within one another:

=over 2

=item 1.
L<UR::Context::Root> - A context to represent all the data reachable in the
application's namespace.  It connects the application to external data
sources.

=item 2.
L<UR::Context::Process> - A context to represent the state of data within
the currently running application.  It handles the transfer of data to and
from the Root context, through the object cache, on behalf of the application
code.

=item 3.
L<UR::Context::Transaction> - A context to represent an in-memory transaction
as a diff of the object cache.  The Transaction keeps a list of changes to
objects and is able to revert those changes with C<rollback()>, or apply them
to the underlying context with C<commit()>.

=back

=head1 CONSTRUCTOR

=over 4

=item begin

  my $trans = UR::Context::Transaction->begin();

L<UR::Context::Transaction> instances are created through C<begin()>.  

=back

A L<UR::Context::Root> and L<UR::Context::Process> context will be created
for you when the application initializes.  Additional instances of these
classes are not usually instantiated.

=head1 METHODS

Most of the methods below can be called as either a class or object method
of UR::Context.  If called as a class method, they will operate on the current
context.

=over 4

=item get_current

  my $context = UR::Context::get_current();

Returns the UR::Context instance of whatever is the most currently created
Context.  Can be called as a class or object method.

=item get_objects_for_class_and_rule

  @objs = $context->get_objects_for_class_and_rule(
                        $class_name,
                        $boolexpr,
                        $should_load,
                        $should_return_iterator
                    );

This is the method that serves as the main entry point to the Context behind
the C<get()>, C<load()> and C<is_loaded()> methods of L<UR::Object>.  

C<$class_name> and C<$boolexpr> are required arguments, and specify the 
target class by name and the rule used to filter the objects the caller
is interested in.  

C<$should_load> is a flag indicating whether the Context should load objects
satisfying the rule from external data sources.  A true value means it should
always ask the relevent data sources, even if the Context believes the 
requested data is in the object cache,  A false but defined value means the
Context should not ask the data sources for new data, but only return what
is currently in the cache matching the rule.  The value C<undef> means the
Context should use its own judgement about asking the data sources for new
data, and will merge cached and external data as necessary to fulfill the
request.

C<$should_return_iterator> is a flag indicating whether this method should
return the objects directly as a list, or iterator function instead.  If
true, it returns a subref that returns one object each time it is called,
and undef after the last matching object:

  my $iter = $context->get_objects_for_class_and_rule(
                           'MyClass',
                           $rule,
                           undef,
                           1
                       );
  my @objs;
  while (my $obj = $iter->());
      push @objs, $obj;
  }

=item has_changes

  my $bool = $context->has_changes();

Returns true if any objects in the given Context's object cache (or the
current Context if called as a class method) have any changes that haven't
been saved to the underlying context.

=item commit

  UR::Context->commit();

Causes all objects with changes to save their changes back to the underlying
context.  If the current context is a L<UR::Context::Transaction>, then the
changes will be applied to whatever Context the transaction is a part of.
if the current context is a L<UR::Context::Process> context, then C<commit()>
pushes the changes to the underlying L<UR::Context::Root> context, meaning 
that those changes will be applied to the relevent data sources.

In the usual case, where no transactions are in play and all data sources
are RDBMS databases, calling C<commit()> will cause the program to begin
issuing SQL against the databases to update changed objects, insert rows
for newly created objects, and delete rows from deleted objects as part of
an SQL transaction.  If all the changes apply cleanly, it will do and SQL
C<commit>, or C<rollback> if not.

commit() returns true if all the changes have been safely transferred to the
underlying context, false if there were problems.

=item rollback

  UR::Context->rollback();

Causes all objects' changes for the current transaction to be reversed.
If the current context is a L<UR::Context::Transaction>, then the
transactional properties of those objects will be reverted to the values
they had when the transaction started.  Outside of a transaction, object
properties will be reverted to their values when they were loaded from the
underlying data source.  rollback() will also ask all the underlying
databases to rollback.

=item clear_cache

  UR::Context->clear_cache();

Asks the current context to remove all non-infrastructional data from its
object cache.  This method will fail and return false if any object has
changes.

=item resolve_data_source_for_object

  my $ds = $obj->resolve_data_source_for_object();

For the given C<$obj> object, return the L<UR::DataSource> instance that 
object was loaded from or would be saved to.  If objects of that class do
not have a data source, then it will return C<undef>.

=item resolve_data_sources_for_class_meta_and_rule

  my @ds = $context->resolve_data_sources_for_class_meta_and_rule($class_obj, $boolexpr);

For the given class metaobject and boolean expression (rule), return the list of
data sources that will need to be queried in order to return the objects
matching the rule.  In most cases, only one data source will be returned.

=item infer_property_value_from_rule

  my $value = $context->infer_property_value_from_rule($property_name, $boolexpr);

For the given boolean expression (rule), and a property name not mentioned in
the rule, but is a property of the class the rule is against, return the value
that property must logically have.

For example, if this object is the only TestClass object where C<foo> is
the value 'bar', it can infer that the TestClass property C<baz> must
have the value 'blah' in the current context.

  my $obj = TestClass->create(id => 1, foo => 'bar', baz=> 'blah');
  my $rule = UR::BoolExpr->resolve('TestClass', foo => 'bar);
  my $val = $context->infer_property_value_from_rule('baz', $rule);
  # val now is 'blah'

=item object_cache_size_highwater

  UR::Context->object_cache_size_highwater(5000);
  my $highwater = UR::Context->object_cache_size_highwater();

Set or get the value for the Context's object cache pruning high water
mark.  The object cache pruner will be run during the next C<get()> if the
cache contains more than this number of prunable objects.  See the 
L</Object Cache Pruner> section below for more information.

=item object_cache_size_lowwater

  UR::Context->object_cache_size_lowwater(5000);
  my $lowwater = UR::Context->object_cache_size_lowwater();

Set or get the value for the Context's object cache pruning high water
mark.  The object cache pruner will stop when the number of prunable objects
falls below this number.

=item prune_object_cache

  UR::Context->prune_object_cache();

Manually run the object cache pruner.


=item _light_cache

  UR::Context->_light_cache(1);

Turn on or off the light caching flag.  Light caching alters the behavior 
of the object cache in that all object references in the cache are made weak
by Scalar::Util::weaken().  This means that the application code must keep
hold of any object references it wants to keep alive.  Light caching defaults
to being off, and must be explicitly turned on with this method.

=back

=head1 Internal Methods

There are many methods in UR::Context meant to be used internally, but are
worth documenting for anyone interested in the inner workings of the Context
code.

=over 4

=item _create_import_iterator_for_underlying_context

  $subref = $context->_create_import_iterator_for_underlying_context(
                          $boolexpr, $data_source, $serial_number
                      );
  $next_obj = $subref->();

This method is part of the object loading process, and is called by
L</get_objects_for_class_and_rule> when it is determined that the requested
data does not exist in the object cache, and data should be brought in from
another, underlying Context.  Usually this means the data will be loaded
from an external data source.

C<$boolexpr> is the L<UR::BoolExpr> rule, usually from the application code.

C<$data_source> is the L<UR::DataSource> that will be used to load data from.

C<$serial_number> is used by the object cache pruner.  Each object loaded
through this iterator will have $serial_number in its C<__get_serial> hashref
key.

It works by first getting an iterator for the data source (the
C<$db_iterator>).  It calls L</_get_template_data_for_loading> to find out
how data is to be loaded and whether this request spans multiple data
sources.  It calls L</__create_object_fabricator_for_loading_template> to get
a list of closures to transform the primary data source's data into UR
objects, and L</_create_secondary_loading_closures> (if necessary) to get
more closures that can load and join data from the primary to the secondary
data source(s).

It returns a subref that works as an iterator, loading and returning objects
one at a time from the underlying context into the current context.  It 
returns undef when there are no more objects to return.

The returned iterator works by first asking the C<$db_iterator> for the next
row of data as a listref.  Asks the secondary data source joiners whether
there is any matching data.  Calls the object fabricator closures to convert
the data source data into UR objects.  If any of the object requires
subclassing, then additional importing iterators are created to handle that.
Finally, the objects matching the rule are returned to the caller one at a
time.

=item _get_template_data_for_loading

  my $template_data = $context->_get_template_data_for_loading(
                                    $data_source,
                                    $boolexpr_tmpl
                                );
  my($template_data, @addl_info) = $context->_get_template_data_for_loading(
                                                 $data_source,
                                                 $boolexpr_tmpl
                                             );

When a request is made that will hit one or more data sources,
C<_get_template_data_for_loading> is used to call a method of the same name
on the data source.  It retuns a hashref used by many other parts of the 
object loading system, and describes what data source to use, how to query
that data source to get the objects, how to use the raw data returned by
the data source to construct objects and how to resolve any delegated
properties that are a part of the rule.

C<$data_source> is a L<UR::DataSource> object ID.  C<$coolexpr_tmpl> is a
L<UR::BoolExpr::Template> object.

In the common case, the query will only use one data source, and this method
returns that data directly.  But if the primary data source sets the 
C<joins_across_data_sources> key on the data structure as may be the case
when a rule involves a delegated property to a class that uses a different
data source, then this methods returns an additional list of data.  For
each additional data source needed to resolve the query, this list will have
three items:

=over 2

=item 1.

The secondary data source ID

=item 2. 

A listref of delegated L<UR::Object::Property> objects joining the primary
data source to this secondary data source.

=item 3. 

A L<UR::BoolExpr::Template> rule template applicable against the secondary
data source

=back

=item _create_secondary_rule_from_primary

  my $new_rule = $context->_create_secondary_rule_from_primary(
                               $primary_rule,
                               $delegated_properties,
                               $secondary_rule_tmpl
                           );

When resolving a request that requires multiple data sources,
this method is used to construct a rule against applicable against the
secondary data source.  C<$primary_rule> is the L<UR::BoolExpr> rule used
in the original query.  C<$delegated_properties> is a listref of
L<UR::Object::Property> objects as returned by
L</_get_template_data_for_loading()> linking the primary to the secondary data
source.  C<$secondary_rule_tmpl> is the rule template, also as returned by 
L</_get_template_data_for_loading()>.

=item _create_secondary_loading_closures

  my($obj_importers, $joiners) = $context->_create_secondary_loading_closures(
                                               $primary_rule_tmpl,
                                               @addl_info);

When reolving a request that spans multiple data sources,
this method is used to construct two lists of subrefs to aid in the request.
C<$primary_rule_tmpl> is the L<UR::BoolExpr::Template> rule template made
from the original rule.  C<@addl_info> is the same list returned by
L</_get_template_data_for_loading>.  For each secondary data source, there
will be one item in the two listrefs that are returned, and in the same
order.

C<$obj_importers> is a listref of subrefs used as object importers.  They
transform the raw data returned by the data sources into UR objects.

C<$joiners> is also a listref of subrefs.  These closures know how the
properties link the primary data source data to the secondary data source.
They take the raw data from the primary data source, load the next row of
data from the secondary data source, and returns the secondary data that
successfully joins to the primary data.  You can think of these closures as
performing the same work as an SQL C<join> between data in different data
sources.

=item __create_object_fabricator_for_loading_template

  $subref = $context->__create_object_fabricator_for_loading_template(
                          $loading_tmpl_hashref,
                          $template_data,
                          $boolexpr,
                          $boolexpr_tmpl,
                          $boolexpr_values_listref,
                          $data_source);
  $obj = $subref->($data_source_data_listref);

This method is part of the object loading process, and is called by
L</get_objects_for_class_and_rule> to transform a row of data returned by
a data source iterator into a UR object.  

For each class involved in a get request, the system prepares a loading
template that describes which columns of the data source data are to be
used to construct an instance of that class.  For example, in the case where
a get() is done on a child class, and the parent and child classes store data
in separate tables linked by a relation-property/foreign-key, then the query
against the data source will involve and SQL join (for RDBMS data sources).
That join will produce a result set that includes data from both tables.

The C<$loading_tmpl_hashref> will have information about which columns of
that result set map to which properties of each involved class.  The heart
of the fabricator closure is a list slice extracting the data for that class
and assigning it to a hash slice of properties to fill in the initial object
data for its class.  The remainder of the closure is bookkeeping to keep the
object cache ($UR::Context::all_objects_loaded) and query cache 
($UR::Context::all_params_loaded) consistent.

The interaction of the object fabricator, the query cache, object cache
pruner and object loading iterators that may or may not have loaded all
their data requires that the object fabricators keep a list of changes they
plan to make to the query cache instead of applying them directly.  When
the Underlying Context Loading iterator has loaded the last row from the
Data Source Iterator, it calls C<finalize()> on the object fabricator to
tell it to go ahead and apply its changes; essentially treating that
data as a transaction.

=item _cache_is_complete_for_class_and_normalized_rule

  ($is_cache_complete, $objects_listref) =
      $context->_cache_is_complete_for_class_and_normalized_rule(
                    $class_name, $boolexpr
                );

This method is part of the object loading process, and is called by
L</get_objects_for_class_and_rule> to determine if the objects requested
by the L<UR::BoolExpr> C<$boolexpr> will be found entirely in the object
cache.  If the answer is yes then C<$is_cache_complete> will be true.
C<$objects_listef> may or may not contain objects matching the rule from
the cache.  If that list is not returned, then
L</get_objects_for_class_and_rule> does additional work to locate the
matching objects itself via L</_get_objects_for_class_and_rule_from_cache>

It does its magic by looking at the C<$boolexpr> and loosely matching it
against the query cache C<$UR::Context::all_params_loaded>

=item _get_objects_for_class_and_rule_from_cache

  @objects = $context->_get_objects_for_class_and_rule_from_cache(
                           $class_name, $boolexpr
                       );

This method is called by L</get_objects_for_class_and_rule> when 
L<_cache_is_complete_for_class_and_normalized_rule> says the requested
objects do exist in the cache, but did not return those items directly.

The L<UR::BoolExpr> C<$boolexpr> contains hints about how the matching data
is likely to be found.  Its C<_context_query_strategy> key will contain
one of three values

=over 2

=item 1.  all

This rule is against a class with no filters, meaning it should return every
member of that class.  It calls C<$class-E<gt>all_objects_loaded> to extract
all objects of that class in the object cache.

=item 2. id

This rule is against a class and filters by only a single ID, or a list of
IDs.  The request is fulfilled by plucking the matching objects right out
of the object cache.

=item 3.

The category for any other rule.  This request is fulfilled by getting a
previously created L<UR::Object::Index> for this rule, or creating a new
UR::Object::Index, and calling L<UR::Object::Index/all_objects_matching>.

=back

=item _loading_was_done_before_with_a_superset_of_this_params_hashref

  $bool = $context->_loading_was_done_before_with_a_superset_of_this_params_hashref(
                        $class_name,
                        $params_hashref
                    );

This method is used by L</_cache_is_complete_for_class_and_normalized_rule>
to determine if the requested data was asked for previously, either from a
get() asking for a superset of the current request, or from a request on
a parent class of the current request.

For example, if a get() is done on a class with one param:

  @objs = ParentClass->get(param_1 => 'foo');

And then later, another request is done with an additional param:

  @objs2 = ParentClass->get(param_1 => 'foo', param_2 => 'bar');

Then the first request must have returned all the data that could have
possibly satisfied the second request, and so the system will not issue
a query against the data source.

As another example, given those two previously done queries, if another
get() is done on a class that inherits from ParentClass

  @objs3 = ChildClass->get(param_1 => 'foo');

again, the first request has already loaded all the relevent data, and
therefore won't query the data source.

=item _sync_databases

  $bool = $context->_sync_databases();

Starts the process of committing all the Context's changes to the external
data sources.  _sync_databases() is the workhorse behind L</commit>.

First, it finds all objects with changes.  Checks those changed objects
for validity with C<$obj-E<gt>invalid>.  If any objects are found invalid,
then _sync_databases() will fail.  Finally, it bins all the changed objects
by data source, and asks each data source to save those objects' changes.
It returns true if all the data sources were able to save the changes,
false otherwise.

=item _reverse_all_changes

  $bool = $context->_reverse_all_changes();

_reverse_all_changes() is the workhorse behind L</rollback>.  

For each class, it goes through each object of that class.  If the object
is a L<UR::Object::Ghost>, representing a deleted object, it converts the
ghost back to the live version of the object.  For other classes, it makes
a list of properties that have changed since they were loaded (represented
by the C<db_committed> hash key in the object), and reverts those changes
by using each property's accessor method.

=back

=head1 The Object Cache

The object cache is integral to the way the Context works, and also the main
difference between UR and other ORMs.  Other systems do no caching and
require the calling application to hold references to any objects it 
is interested in.  Say one part of the app loads data from the database and
gives up its references, then if another part of the app does the same or
similar query, it will have to ask the database again.

UR handles caching of classes, objects and queries to avoid asking the data
sources for data it has loaded previously.  The object cache is essentially
a software transaction that sits above whatever database transaction is
active.  After objects are loaded, any changes, creations or deletions exist
only in the object cache, and are not saved to the underlying data sources
until the application explicitly requests a commit or rollback.  

Objects are returned to the application only after they are inserted into
the object cache.  This means that if disconnected parts of the application
are returned objects with the same class and ID, they will have references
to the same exact object reference, and changes made in one part will be
visible to all other parts of the app.  An unchanged object can be removed
from the object cache by calling its C<unload()> method.

Since changes to the underlying data sources are effectively delayed, it is
possible that the application's notion of the object's current state does
not match the data stored in the data source.  You can mitigate this by using
the C<load()> class or object method to fetch the latest data if it's a
problem.  Another issue to be aware of is if multiple programs are likely
to commit conflicting changes to the same data, then whichever applies its
changes last will win; some kind of external locking needs to be applied.
Finally, if two programs attempt to insert data with the same ID columns
into an RDBMS table, the second application's commit will fail, since that
will likely violate a constraint.

=head2 Object Change Tracking

As objects are loaded from their data sources, their properties are
initialized with the data from the query, and a copy of the same data is
stored in the object in its C<db_committed> hash key.  Anyone can ask the
object for a list of its changes by calling C<$obj-E<gt>changed>.
Internally, changed() goes through all the object's properties, comparing
the current values in the object's hash with the same keys under
'db_committed'.  

Objects created through the C<create()> class method have no 'db_committed',
and so the object knows it it a newly created object in this context.

Every time an object is retrieved with get() or through an iterator, it is
assigned a serial number in its C<__get_serial> hash key from the
C<$UR::Context::GET_SERIAL> counter.  This number is unique and increases
with each get(), and is used by the L</Object Cache Pruner> to expire the
least recently requested data.

Objects also track what parameters have been used to get() them in the hash
C<$obj-E<gt>{load}-E<gt>{param_key}>.  This is a copy of the data in
C<$UR::Context::all_params_loaded-E<gt>{$class_name}>.  For each rule
ID, it will have a count of the number of times that rule was used in a get().

=head2 Deleted Objects and Ghosts

Calling delete() on an object is tracked in a different way.  First, a new
object is created, called a ghost.  Ghost classes exist for every
class in the application and are subclasses of L<UR::Object::Ghost>.  For
example, the ghost class for MyClass is MyClass::Ghost.  This ghost object
is initialized with the data from the original object.  The original object
is removed from the object cache, and is reblessed into the UR::DeletedRef
class.  Any attempt to interact with the object further will raise an
exception.

Ghost objects are not included in a get() request on the regular class,
though the app can ask for them specificly using
C<MyClass::Ghost-E<gt>get(%params)>.

Ghost classes do not have ghost classes themselves.  Calling create() or
delete() on a Ghost class or object will raise an exception.  Calling other
methods on the Ghost object that exist on the original, live class will
delegate over to the live class's method.

=head2 all_objects_are_loaded

C<$UR::Context::all_objects_are_loaded> is a hashref keyed by class names.
If the value is true, then L</_cache_is_complete_for_class_and_normalized_rule>
knows that all the instances of that class exist in the object cache, and
it can avoid asking the underlying context/datasource for that class' data.

=head2 all_params_loaded

C<$UR::Context::all_params_loaded> is a two-level hashref.  The first level
is class names.  The second level is rule (L<UR::BoolExpr>) IDs.  The values
are how many times that class and rule have been involved in a get().  This
data is used by L</_loading_was_done_before_with_a_superset_of_this_params_hashref>
to determine if the requested data will be found in the object cache for
non-id queries.

=head2 all_objects_loaded

C<$UR::Context::all_objects_loaded> is a two-level hashref.  The first level
is class names.  The second level is object IDs.  Every time an object is
created, defined or loaded from an underlying context, it is inserted into
the C<all_objects_loaded> hash.  For queries involving only ID properties,
the Context can retrieve them directly out of the cache if they appear there.

The entire cache can be purged of non-infrastructional objects by calling
L</clear_cache>.

=head2 Object Cache Pruner

The default Context behavior is to cache all objects it knows about for the
entire life of the process.  For programs that churn through large amounts 
of data, or live for a long time, this is probably not what you want.  

The Context has two settings to loosely control the size of the object
cache.  L</object_cache_size_highwater> and L</object_cache_size_lowwater>.
As objects are created and loaded, a count of uncachable objects is kept
in C<$UR::Context::all_objects_cache_size>.  The first part of 
L</get_objects_for_class_and_rule> checks to see of the current size is
greater than the highwater setting, and call L</prune_object_cache> if so.

prune_object_cache() works by looking at what C<$UR::Context::GET_SERIAL>
was the last time it ran, and what it is now, and making a guess about 
what object serial number to use as a guide for removing objects by starting
at 10% of the difference between the last serial and the current value,
called the target serial.


It then starts executing a loop as long as C<$UR::Context::all_objects_cache_size>
is greater than the lowwater setting.  For each uncachable object, if its
C<__get_serial> is less than the target serial, it is weakened from any
L<UR::Object::Index>es it may be a member of, and then weakened from the
main object cache, C<$UR::Context::all_objects_loaded>.

The application may lock an object in the cache by calling C<__strengthen__> on
it,  Likewise, the app may hint to the pruner to throw away an object as 
soon as possible by calling C<__weaken__>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<UR::Context::Root>, L<UR::Context::Process>, L<UR::Object>,
L<UR::DataSource>, L<UR::Object::Ghost>


